---
layout: post
title: "oauth"
date: 2022-11-09
categories: oauth, authentication
---

## Before oauth

- The third party software wants to access the google or twitter api on your behalf then these apps used to ask for google/twitter user name and password. Its very hard to trust these app and we can't we user/password to them.
- Handing the username/password to a third party app gives full access to the api.
- Oauth also solves the problem of single sign on.
- Oauth solves this problem by not asking username and password.

## Oauth vs OpenID connect

- Oauth analogy:
- When you go to hotel the front desk(oauth server) check your identity(username/password) and handles over the access card (bearer token) which opens only your room, jim etc (resource servers).
- OpenID adds the information like username, display photo etc on top of the oauth token. Openid connect is the extension of oauth. Oauth issues access tokens and OpenID issues Id tokens. Oauth is for access APIs, OpenID is for identifying users.

## Roles in Oauth

- _User_ - One who uses the device. This termed as _Resource Owner_
- _Device_ - The equipment which runs the application. This _User Agent_
- _Application_ - The app which accesses the API. This _Client_
- _API_ - API is the place where data lives. This is _Resource Server_
- _Autherization Server_ - This is server where username/password lives.

## Types of client

- Public client. These are the applications like SPA, application that are install on the mobile phones where user have direct access.
- Confidential client. These are the application that are installed on server, which user doesn't have direct access. The confidential clients may get the token by clientid and secret. Since this are confidential clients, the oauth server doesn't need any prompt for the user consent screen.

## User Consent

- Password grant or Resource owner password flow: The application prompts for username and password. Then collect this password and send it to authorization server. The problem with this is the authorization server doesn't know if the user is trying to access the resource or the app is trying use the stored password to access the resource. Also the password is handed to a app that is developed by a third part team. This type of password grant flow is not recommended. This flow also doesn't support user consent screen and hard to implement MFA.
- Redirect based flow: In which the user is redirected to the authorization server to enter the password and MFA. This flow is also interrupted with the user consent screen, presenting user with the type of access.

## Front Channel vs Back Channel

- Front Channel: In this the data is exchange by using the url in the address bar
- Back Channel: This is more secure and data is passed using https and there is no way to tramper the data.

## Implicit flow

- This flow user front channel, where the application redirect the user to the authorization server passing the information in the browser url. The token from the authorization is sent back to the application is passed in the browser redirect url. This flow is not secure and no more recommended. This flow is going to phased out in up coming oauth specification.

## Application identity

- For the public apps its hard to have a client secret and client id as application identity. This is because these are public apps (like SPA) and anyone can impersonate. Thats the reason applications uses the redirect url as the application identity. These urls are unique and can't be impersonated.

## Client Registration

- We need to register the client with authorization server. The confidential client also get client secret along with the client id. The public client need to the enter the redirect url which serves as application identity.

## Authorization Code Flow

- Authorization Code Flow: The public client generates a random unique secret (PKCE Code Verifier) and hashes it (PKCE Code Challenge) and redirects the user to the authorization server with this PKCE Code Challenge, client id, scope etc. in the front channel. The authorization server sends back the authorization code in the front channel using redirect url. This authorization has short expiration (typically under a minute). The application then sends a request with same secrete in plain text and authorization code in back channel to get the authorization token in back channel. The authorization makes sure this request is from client by generating the hash of the secret and comparing the PKCE Code Challenge send in the initial request.

## Native app problem

- The native apps redirect to the browser and browser back to the app. This user experience is not so good.
- The native apps may use web view control to mitigate above issue but this as other problem like:

  - The web view control would not share the session cookie with browser for security reasons and due to this user as to enter the username/password every time
  - The web view control is embedded in the app, so the app as complete control over the user entered credentials and this defies the whole oauth purpose.

- With latest mobile development the above issue are gone. Now the app can display the browser inside the app and the browser can share the cookies. On iOS we have _SFSafariViewController_ and on android we have _Chrome Custom Tabs_.

## Protecting the tokens in the browser

- Browser are vulnerable to the cross site scripting(XSS). That means any javascript code that is injected into the SPA can access the token. The browser can store the token in 1. Local storage (which is accessible across the tabs, available after closing browser) 2. Session storage (is only available on page refresh and not available cross tabs), 3. Cookies old way of storing token.

- To avoid XSS to access token we can use Service Worker or WebCrypto web api. The service worker code would send the request to the token and have access to it.

## Dynamic Backend Server

- The browser request for the authorization code and hands this code to the Dynamic Backend Server(DBS). Then this DBS server send the request to get the oauth token and sends back the browser with session token. The browser only has access to the session token and it can make API request to DBS using this session token.

## Device flow

- Device sends a request to authorization code with the client id and get back a long and short codes. It also get the activation url, polling interval and expiration time
- User enters the activation url on the phone, does the login
- The device polls the authorization server to check if user completed the login. Once its done the authorization return the device the access token, refresh token.

## Client Credentials

- Used for confidential clients

## Grant types

- _password_ grant - Used in Resource owner flow
- _client credentials_ - Used in Client credentials flow
- _authorization code_ - Used in Authorization Code flow

## Response types

- _code_ - Used to get the authorization code
- id_token - Used to get the openid token

## OpenID connect

- This is an extension of oauth token
- ID Token (JWT token) is used to find more information about the user (resource owner)
- JWT token has three part
  - Header - About token - Signing alogorithm, identifier that signed the key
  - Payload - Actual data - The user details
  - Signature - Validation

## Access tokens vs ID token

- Format of both looks same
- Access token are opaque means there is nothing to be inferred from the access token. Its just a key to access the API.
- Access tokens are not always JWT but ID tokens are always JWT and the application would know to validate and decode the ID tokens.

## Requesting ID token

- ID token can be request in the same call that is for geting access token. To get access token we need send the additional scope as openid.
- The authorization server sends id token along with the access token.
