---
layout: post
title: "power bi"
date: 2025-04-25
categories: power bi, pivot table
---

## Power bi setting

- Uncheck the Data Load option
  - Update or delete relationships when referring data
  - Autodetect new relationships adter data is loaded
  - Aut data/time

## Power bi views

- Power Query editor
  - Prepare data
- Model view
  - Build relationships
- Data view
  - Add Calculations
- Report view
  - Visualize the data

## Storage modes and connection modes

- Import mode
  - This is default mode. The tables are stored in the memory within Power BI and queries are fulfilled by cached data.
- Direct Query
  - Tables are connected directly. This is used when data is large. Data is not cache or imported
- Composite mode
  - Combination of both modes
- Live Connection
  - Central repo

## Data formats

- Data types are used to stored data
- Data formats are for displaying data

## DAX - Data Analysis Expressions

- DAX are used on the Power BI front end where as M code is used in Power Query Editor for transforming data
- DAX Calculated columns have row context and should not be used for aggregations
- For aggregation formula, use DAX measures.

## Data Visualization key question

- What type of data are you working with?
  - Geospatial? Time-series? Hierarchical? Financial?
- What do you want to communicate?
  - Comparison? Composition? Relationship? Distribution?
- Who is the END USER and what they need?
  - Analyst? Manager? Executive? General public?

## Dashboards

- Dashboards are analytics tools designed to consolidate data from multiple sources, track key metrics at a glance, and facilitate data-driven storytelling and decision making.

## Dashboard design

1. Define the purpose
2. Choose the right metrics
3. Present the data effectively
4. Eliminate clutter & noise
5. Use layout to focus attention
6. Tell a clear story

## Reading pattern

- F pattern
- Z pattern

## Dashboard filter types

- Visual level filters
- Page level filters
- Report level filters

## HasOneValue - Condition to check if there is only one value in filter.
